README.md, before:

# OpenScience course in Jyväskylä, November 2016

This is the repository for the Introduction to Open Science course, to be held
in Jyväskylä in November 2016. This repository contains the **course material
used for the bootcamp practicals** (room MaD205, 15th-17th Nov., 08:15-16:00).

For the home website of the course, please visit the
[course wiki](https://github.com/OpenScienceCourse-JyU-2015/courseMaterial/wiki).

## Work still in progress!

All practicals material will be made available here.

- **Day one (Tue Nov 15th 8:15 - 16:00):**
	- *[Introduction to the Unix shell (morning)](day-01-am_the-unix-shell/introduction-unix-shell.md)* (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-01-am_the-unix-shell))
  - *Data organisation (afternoon))* (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-01-pm_data-organisation))

- **Day two (Wed Nov 16th 8:15 - 16:00):**
  - *Introduction to Python (morning)* (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-02-am_intro-to-python))
  - *[Version control with Git (afternoon)](day-02-pm_version-control/version-control-with-git.md)* (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-02-pm_version-control))

- **Day three (Thu Nov 17th 8:15 - 14:00):**
	**A case study: from data to analysis** (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-03_case-study))
  - *Data processing*
  - *Data analysis*

Commit message:

Add data management and intro to python files, update readme

README.md, after:

# OpenScience course in Jyväskylä, November 2016

This is the repository for the Introduction to Open Science course, to be held
in Jyväskylä in November 2016. This repository contains the **course material
used for the bootcamp practicals** (room MaD205, 15th-17th Nov., 08:15-16:00).

For the home website of the course, please visit the
[course wiki](https://github.com/OpenScienceCourse-JyU-2015/courseMaterial/wiki).

## Work still in progress!

All practicals material will be made available here.

- **Day one (Tue Nov 15th 8:15 - 16:00):**
	- *[Introduction to the Unix shell (morning)](day-01-am_the-unix-shell/introduction-unix-shell.md)* (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-01-am_the-unix-shell))  
  - *[Data organisation and management (afternoon)](day-01-pm_data-organisation-management/data-organisation-management.md)* (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-01-pm_data-organisation))

- **Day two (Wed Nov 16th 8:15 - 16:00):**
  - *[Introduction to Python and Jupyter notebooks (morning)](day-02-am_intro-to-python/python-jupyter-introduction.md)* (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-02-am_intro-to-python))
  - *[Version control with Git (afternoon)](day-02-pm_version-control/version-control-with-git.md)* (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-02-pm_version-control))

- **Day three (Thu Nov 17th 8:15 - 14:00):**
	**A case study: from data to analysis** (see the [Etherpad](https://etherpad.wikimedia.org/p/jyybio_day-03_case-study))
  - *Data processing*
  - *Data analysis*
